# Rivergrove City Council Meeting Minutes
## June 12, 2017

---

## CALL TO ORDER AND ROLL CALL

The meeting was called to order at River Grove Elementary school at 7:03 p.m.

**Present:** Mayor Heather Kibbey, Councilors Carolyn Bahrman, Arne Nyberg, and Brenda Ruble.

**Absent:** Councilor Bill Tuttle

Leanne Moll declared a quorum.

## PUBLIC COMMENT ON NON-AGENDA ITEMS

None.

## CONSENT AGENDA

### 1. Minutes from May 8, 2017 Meeting

**Motion:** Councilor Bahrman moved to accept the May 8, 2017 meeting minutes as submitted. Councilor Ruble seconded the motion. It passed 3-0. Councilor Nyberg abstained.

### 2. May Financials

**Motion:** Councilor Nyberg moved to accept the May financials as submitted. Mayor Kibbey seconded. It passed 4-0.

## OLD BUSINESS

None.

## NEW BUSINESS

Councilor Nyberg suggested that the City of Rivergrove could contract out City police services with Clackamas County, like the City of Wilsonville for increased patrols in parks and the boat ramp. Councilor Bahrman suggested that the City first consider the cost. Councilor Nyberg said that the City would need to adjust the line-item in the budget. Mayor Kibbey noted that it may increase our taxes because it is "enhanced services." The Councilors believed that we were already paying an "enhanced service" tax as residents. Mayor Kibbey suggested that the City of Rivergrove has different "enhanced services" based on the municipal service area issues. Michael Salch recalled that Mayor Barrett dropped those enhanced services in the late 1990s. Mayor Kibbey will call the County to assess if the County provides park security for the City parks, or if the City needs to pass an ordinance.

### 1. Adoption of Resolution 254-2017 to declaring the City's election to receive state revenues

**Motion:** Mayor Kibbey moved to declare the City's election to receive state funds. Councilor Nyberg seconded. It passed 4-0.

### 2. Adoption of Resolution 253-2017 Budget FY 2017-2018

Mayor Kibbey noted that the budget may need to change for Professional Services due to costs accrued by training run by City Planner Carole Connell.

**Motion:** Councilor Nyberg moved to adopt Resolution 253-2017 Budget FY 2017-2018 with the following amendment. Councilor Ruble seconded. It passed 4-0.

**Amendment:** Professional Services item increases $2000 from $1500 - $3500 in the General Fund Budget.

### 3. Information Request Fees

The City Manager will research the records retention costs of local municipalities to see if the City of Rivergrove is in line with the practices of other Cities.

## PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT

Planning Commission Chair Andrew Dausman joined the Council to share recent endeavors by the Planning Commission. After a successful class led by City Planner, Carole Connell, Chair Dausman would like the Commission to work on a particular issue, such as accessory dwelling units, transportation (speed limits), annexation (the Commission continues to defer to Council), docks, street maintenance, or a revision of the tree-cutting ordinance. Chair Dausman would like to see more public policy items discussed in the Planning Commission and would like to hold more public input forums.

The Council suggested that dock applications could be streamlined and the deposit could be $500 instead of $1000. Michael Salch suggested that tree removals should have a higher deposit or bond, so the applicant is more likely to replace or mitigate the trees.

## COMMITTEE REPORTS

### 1. Transportation

Councilor Bahrman recounted a recent communication with Clackamas County where it was communicated that the City could proceed with design of the proposed traffic calming on Childs Road if Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue supports the plan. Currently, TVFD does not support raised crosswalks on roads designated as Primary Response routes. The County suggested the following alternatives:

1) Permanent radar speed feedback signs on Childs, facing both ways. These have been shown to be effective in reducing overall vehicle speeds.

2) Speed cushions, which may be approved for Secondary Response Routes.

The costs for either alternatives are not likely to exceed that for raised crosswalks. Councilor Bahrman has been attempting to reach TVFR to discuss the County's options.

### 2. Parks

Councilor Nyberg reported that Dave Skoglund has decided to retire, so the City has hired another mower who will mow Heritage Park on Tuesday June, 13 at 9:00 a.m. Logan Richards has also retired and has appointed a new high school student who is mowing Lloyd Minor Park. Mayor Kibbey noted that Clackamas County will be mowing the sides of Sycamore Street at no cost to the City. Councilor Nyberg also reported that the Stark dock has seen less use now that the City is keeping the gate closed.

### 3. Giving

Councilor Ruble is crafting a letter to solicit gifts from residents and will work with Mayor Kibbey and Commissioner Jonathan Sweet on the details.

## COUNCILOR'S REPORTS

None.

## ADJOURNMENT

**Motion:** Councilor Nyberg moved to adjourn the meeting. Councilor Ruble seconded.

**Motion passed 4-0.**

The meeting was adjourned at 8:24 p.m.

**Respectfully submitted,**  
Leanne Moll  
City Manager/City Recorder